update the draft and models for 02 version (#3)
YuChaode/draft-tan-ccamp-fgotn-yang: draft-tan-ccamp-fgotn-yang.md

--- abstract

> This document defines YANG data models to describe the topology and tunnel information of a fine grain Optical Transport Network. The YANG data models defined in this document are designed to meet the requirements for efficient transmission of sub-1Gbit/s client signals in transport network.

Reviewer: The change agreed in https://github.com/YuChaode/draft-tan-ccamp-fgotn-yang/pull/3#discussion_r1980034578 has been lost:

```suggestion
This document defines YANG data models to describe the topology and tunnel information of a fine grain Optical Transport Network. The YANG data models defined in this document are designed to meet the requirements for efficient transmission of sub-1G client signals in transport network.
```

In the latest version of OTN, ITU-T G.709/Y.1331 Edition 6.5 {{ITU-T_G.709}}, the fine grain OTN (fgOTN) is introduced for the efficient transmission of low rate client signals (e.g., sub-1G).

> This document presents the control interface requirements of fgOTN, and defines two YANG data models for fgOTN topology and fgOTN tunnel. The topology model can capture topological and resource-related information pertaining to fgOTN. The fgOTN tunnel YANG data model defined in this document is used for the provisioning and management of fgOTN Traffic Engineering (TE) tunnels, Label Switched Paths (LSPs) and interfaces.

Author: ```suggestion
This document presents the control interface requirements of fgOTN, and defines two YANG data models for fgOTN topology and fgOTN tunnel. The topology model can capture topological and resource-related information pertaining to fgOTN. The fgOTN tunnel YANG data model defined in this document is used for the provisioning and management of fgOTN Traffic Engineering (TE) tunnels and Label Switched Paths (LSPs).
```

# Fine grain Optical Transport Network Scenarios Overview

OTN network will cover a larger scope of networks, it may include the backbone network, metro core, metro aggregation, metro access, and even the OTN CPE in the customers' networks {{ITU-T_G.709.20}}. In general, the metro OTN networks support both fgODUflex and ODUk switching.  At the boundary nodes (e.g., metro-core nodes) of the metro OTN networks, the fgODUflexes to other metro OTN networks are multiplexed into ODUk of backbone networks. Therefore, the backbone OTN network could only support ODUk switching.

The typical scenarios for fgOTN is to provide low bit rate private line or private network services for customers. The interface function requirements of fgOTN mainly include resource allocation and service provisioning. Three scenarios that require special consideration are listed based on the characteristics of fgOTN.

## Retrieve Server Tunnels Scenario of fgOTN

> Figure 1 below shows an example of scenario to retrieve server tunnels for multi-domain fgOTN service. In this example, some small bandwidth fgOTN service are aggregated by the access ring (10G), and then aggregated into a bigger bandwidth in metro ring (100G). The allocation of TS to support fgOTN switching maybe different in access ring and metro ring. E.g. there could be three ODU0 allocated in the access ring while there could be two ODU2 are allocated in the metro ring to support fgOTN switching. In this example, the server layer ODUk tunnel for fgOTN tunnel is different in access ring and metro ring. The server layer dependency tunnel for fgOTN tunnel will include one ODU0 tunnel and one ODU2 tunnel.

Reviewer: Resolved with https://github.com/YuChaode/draft-tan-ccamp-fgotn-yang/pull/3/commits/5c385ec3f312ea76c8186e3dbc9c9592ee72cac1

# Fine grain Optical Transport Network Scenarios Overview

OTN network will cover a larger scope of networks, it may include the backbone network, metro core, metro aggregation, metro access, and even the OTN CPE in the customers' networks {{ITU-T_G.709.20}}. In general, the metro OTN networks support both fgODUflex and ODUk switching.  At the boundary nodes (e.g., metro-core nodes) of the metro OTN networks, the fgODUflexes to other metro OTN networks are multiplexed into ODUk of backbone networks. Therefore, the backbone OTN network could only support ODUk switching.

The typical scenarios for fgOTN is to provide low bit rate private line or private network services for customers. The interface function requirements of fgOTN mainly include resource allocation and service provisioning. Three scenarios that require special consideration are listed based on the characteristics of fgOTN.

## Retrieve Server Tunnels Scenario of fgOTN

> Figure 1 below shows an example of scenario to retrieve server tunnels for multi-domain fgOTN service. In this example, some small bandwidth fgOTN service are aggregated by the access ring (10G), and then aggregated into a bigger bandwidth in metro ring (100G). The allocation of TS to support fgOTN switching maybe different in access ring and metro ring. E.g. there could be three ODU0 allocated in the access ring while there could be two ODU2 are allocated in the metro ring to support fgOTN switching. In this example, the server layer ODUk tunnel for fgOTN tunnel from node A to node E is ODU0, and the server layer tunnel from node E to node G is ODU2. The server layer tunnel for fgOTN tunnel will include one ODU0 tunnel and one ODU2 tunnel.

Reviewer: Kramdown syntax:

```suggestion
{{fig-multiplexing scenario}} below shows an example of scenario to retrieve server tunnels for multi-domain fgOTN service. In this example, some small bandwidth fgOTN service are aggregated by the access ring (10G), and then aggregated into a bigger bandwidth in metro ring (100G). The allocation of TS to support fgOTN switching maybe different in access ring and metro ring. E.g. there could be three ODU0 allocated in the access ring while there could be two ODU2 are allocated in the metro ring to support fgOTN switching. In this example, the server layer ODUk tunnel for fgOTN tunnel from node A to node E is ODU0, and the server layer tunnel from node E to node G is ODU2. The server layer tunnel for fgOTN tunnel will include one ODU0 tunnel and one ODU2 tunnel.
```

~~~~ ascii-art

      +-----+
      |  A  | \                                 |
      +-----+  \            Domain 1            |      Domain 2
         |      \                               |
         |  10G  \                              |
         |        \                             |
      +-----+       +-----+         +-----+     |     +-----+
      |  B  | \     |  E  |---------|  G  |-----------|  I  |---------
      +-----+  \  / +-----+         +-----+           +-----+
                \/    |      100G      |                 |    100G
                /\    |                |                 |
      +-----+  /  \ +-----+         +-----+           +-----+
      |  C  | /     |  F  |---------|  H  |-----------|  J  |---------
      +-----+       +-----+         +-----+           +-----+
         |         /
         |  10G   /
         |       /
      +-----+   /
      |  D  |  /
      +-----+

~~~~
{: #fig-multiplexing scenario title="The Scenario to Retrieve Server Tunnels"}

## Multi-layer Path Splicing Scenario of fgOTN

> Not all nodes in the operator network support fgOTN, as shown in figure 2, node 5 and node 6 do not support fgOTN. To present the end-to-end primary-path and secondary-path of the services on the client side, it is necessary to complete the end-to-end path splicing based on the the ODU tunnel information associated with the fgotn tunnel.

Reviewer: Kramdown syntax and alignment of the names of the nodes:

```suggestion
Not all nodes in the operator network support fgOTN, as shown in {{fig-service protection}}, node N-f5 and node N-f6 do not support fgOTN. To present the end-to-end primary-path and secondary-path of the services on the client side, it is necessary to complete the end-to-end path splicing based on the the ODU tunnel information associated with the fgotn tunnel.
```

             / ----------primary-path------------ \
            / /                                  \ \
           +-----+                            +-----+
         |  f1 |                                |  f4 |
           +-----+                            +-----+
            \ \                                  / /
             \ ---------secondary-path----------- /
              \    +------+          +------+    /
               ----| N-f5 |----------| N-f6 |----
                   +------+          +------+
~~~~
{: #fig-service protection scenario title="Protection Scenario of fgOTN"}

## Hitless Resizing Scenario of fgOTN

{{ITU-T_G.709}} defines the data plane procedure to support fgODUflex hitless resizing. The support of management of hitless resizing of fgODUflex needs to be carefully considered.

The range of fgOTN service's Bandwidth on Demand (BoD) cannot exceed its server layer's bandwidth.

The client needs to know how many bandwidth of a link is allocated for fgOTN. During the hitless resizing process, it is necessary to reserve or mark the corresponding bandwidth resources first, and then trigger the the resizing actions.

> Multi-domain hitless resizing should be supported. In the case of hitless resizing within a single domain, the "explicit route object" structure is not required. However, for multi-domain hitless resizing scenario, it is necessary to specify the ODUk TS and fgts numbers information on the ports of cross domain nodes in "explicit route objects" structure. For example, node 2 and node 3 in Figure 3. When there are multiple cross domain fgOTN service hitless resizing, the MDSC coordinator needs to issue the service resizing instructions to the domain controllers where the service source and destination are located separately.

Reviewer: Kramdown syntax:

```suggestion
Multi-domain hitless resizing should be supported. In the case of hitless resizing within a single domain, the "explicit route object" structure is not required. However, for multi-domain hitless resizing scenario, it is necessary to specify the ODUk TS and fgts numbers information on the ports of cross domain nodes in "explicit route objects" structure. For example, node 2 and node 3 in {{fig-hitless resizing}}. When there are multiple cross domain fgOTN service hitless resizing, the MDSC coordinator needs to issue the service resizing instructions to the domain controllers where the service source and destination are located separately.
```

## Service Protection Scenario of fgOTN

> As described in {{ITU-T_G.709}}, the functional requirements of fgOTN include support fgODUflex SNCP 1+1 protection. The protection of fgOTN service should rely on the protection of fgOTN tunnel. Not all nodes in the operator network support fgOTN, as shown in figure 2, node 5 and node 6 do not support fgOTN. To present the end-to-end primary-path and secondary-path of the services on the client side, it is necessary to complete the end-to-end path splicing based on the the ODU tunnel information associated with the fgotn tunnel.

Author: Dr.Tan will modify the description. The requirement is to provide multi-layer path object in the LSP, there is no relationship with protection.

> As described in {{ITU-T_G.709}}, the functional requirements of fgOTN include support fgODUflex SNCP 1+1 protection. The protection of fgOTN service should rely on the protection of fgOTN tunnel. Not all nodes in the operator network support fgOTN, as shown in figure 2, node 5 and node 6 do not support fgOTN. To present the end-to-end primary-path and secondary-path of the services on the client side, it is necessary to complete the end-to-end path splicing based on the the ODU tunnel information associated with the fgotn tunnel.

Reviewer: The section title has been properly updated but the description and figure is still bound to the protection configuration.

I would suggest to keep the text as it is for the v02 update to present at the April 10, 2025 interim meeting and create a new issue to track the need improve this description

> As described in {{ITU-T_G.709}}, the functional requirements of fgOTN include support fgODUflex SNCP 1+1 protection. The protection of fgOTN service should rely on the protection of fgOTN tunnel. Not all nodes in the operator network support fgOTN, as shown in figure 2, node 5 and node 6 do not support fgOTN. To present the end-to-end primary-path and secondary-path of the services on the client side, it is necessary to complete the end-to-end path splicing based on the the ODU tunnel information associated with the fgotn tunnel.

Author: The comment is tracked by the issue #9

~~~~ ascii-art
                   +-----+            +-----+
               ----|  f2 |------------|  f3 |----
              /    +-----+            +-----+    \
             / ----------primary-path------------ \
            / /                                  \ \
           +-----+                            +-----+
         |  f1 |                                |  f4 |
           +-----+                            +-----+
            \ \                                  / /
             \ ---------secondary-path----------- /
              \    +------+          +------+    /
               ----| N-f5 |----------| N-f6 |----
                   +------+          +------+
~~~~
{: #fig-service protection scenario title="Protection Scenario of fgOTN"}

## Hitless Resizing Scenario of fgOTN

> {{ITU-T_G.709}} defines the data plane procedure to support fgODUflex hitless resizing. The support of management of hitless resizing of fgODUflex needs to be carefully considered. Firstly, the range of fgOTN service's Bandwidth on Demand (BoD) cannot exceed its server layer's bandwidth. Secondly, the client needs to know how many bandwidth of a link is allocated for fgOTN. During the hitless resizing process, it is necessary to reserve or mark the corresponding bandwidth resources first, and then trigger the the resizing actions. Thirdly, cross domain hitless resizing should be supported. In the case of hitless resizing within a single domain, the "explicit route object" structure is not required. However, for cross domain hitless resizing scenario, it is necessary to specify the ODUk TS and fgts numbers information on the ports of cross domain nodes in "explicit route objects" structure. For example, node 2 and node 3 in Figure 3. When there are multiple cross domain fgOTN service hitless resizing, the MDSC coordinator needs to issue the service resizing instructions to the domain controllers where the service source and destination are located separately.

Author: Dr.Tan will help to simplify this paragraph. And for the hitless resizing comment, we have create an issue to trace.

> {{ITU-T_G.709}} defines the data plane procedure to support fgODUflex hitless resizing. The support of management of hitless resizing of fgODUflex needs to be carefully considered. Firstly, the range of fgOTN service's Bandwidth on Demand (BoD) cannot exceed its server layer's bandwidth. Secondly, the client needs to know how many bandwidth of a link is allocated for fgOTN. During the hitless resizing process, it is necessary to reserve or mark the corresponding bandwidth resources first, and then trigger the the resizing actions. Thirdly, cross domain hitless resizing should be supported. In the case of hitless resizing within a single domain, the "explicit route object" structure is not required. However, for cross domain hitless resizing scenario, it is necessary to specify the ODUk TS and fgts numbers information on the ports of cross domain nodes in "explicit route objects" structure. For example, node 2 and node 3 in Figure 3. When there are multiple cross domain fgOTN service hitless resizing, the MDSC coordinator needs to issue the service resizing instructions to the domain controllers where the service source and destination are located separately.

Reviewer: Resolved with https://github.com/YuChaode/draft-tan-ccamp-fgotn-yang/pull/3/commits/5c385ec3f312ea76c8186e3dbc9c9592ee72cac1

        | Controller |                 | Controller |               | Controller |
        |     1      |                 |     2      |               |     3      |
        +------------+                 +------------+               +------------+
                                    End-to-end fgOTN service
   <--------------------------------------------------------------------------------->
   +------+       +------+       +------+       +------+       +------+       +------+
   | node |-------| node |-------| node |-------| node |-------| node |-------| node |
   |  1   |-------|  2   |-------|  3   |-------|  4   |-------|  5   |-------|  6   |
   +------+       +------+   |   +------+       +------+   |   +------+       +------+
    source                   |                             |                 destination
          Domain 1           |          Domain 2           |           Domain 3
                             |                             |
~~~~
{: #fig-hitless resizing scenario title="Hitless Resizing Scenario of fgOTN"}

# YANG Data Model for fine grain Optical Transport Network Overview

> In order to provide fgOTN capabilities, this document defines two extension YANG data models augmenting to OTN topology and OTN tunnel YANG model. The attributes related to fgOTN are augments from OTN topology data model, and fgOTN topology is not treated as a separate hierarchy. The fgOTN tunnel is defined as a separate tunnel hierarchy, and the fgOTN tunnels need to be pre-set and created before the service provisioning process.

Author: TODO: Italo will help to rephrase this sentence. 
The meaning of this sentence is to illustrate the usage of YANG data model. The fgOTN topology should not be a seperated network topology while fgOTN tunnel could be a new layer.

> In order to provide fgOTN capabilities, this document defines two extension YANG data models augmenting to OTN topology and OTN tunnel YANG model. The attributes related to fgOTN are augments from OTN topology data model, and fgOTN topology is not treated as a separate hierarchy. The fgOTN tunnel is defined as a separate tunnel hierarchy, and the fgOTN tunnels need to be pre-set and created before the service provisioning process.

Reviewer: @tanyanxia @YuChaode : what about the following rephrasing?

```suggestion
In order to provide fgOTN capabilities, this document defines two YANG data models augmenting the OTN topology and the OTN tunnel YANG data models, as defined in {{!I-D.ietf-ccamp-otn-topo-yang}} and {{!I-D.ietf-ccamp-otn-tunnel-model}}.

As defined in Annex M of {{ITU-T_G.709}}, fgOTN is defining a new path layer network which complements the existing OTN. Therefore:

- A single network topology instance is used to report both OTN and fgOTN topology information: fgOTN technology-specific attributes are therefore defined in the fgOTN topology model as augmentations of the OTN topology model, but without defining a new network type for fgOTN.

- The OTN tunnel model can be used to setup either an OTN or an fgOTN tunnel: fgOTN technology-specific attributes are therefore defined in the fgOTN tunnel model as augmentations of the OTN tunnel model, which are applicable only when the OTN tunnel is an fgOTN tunnel.
```

I would like to describe that the same switching-type and encoding types can be used for ODUk and fgODUflex and therefore that a new odu-type value shall be defined by I think it is too early. We can update this text when we have agreed on this point

~~~~
{: #fig-fgotn-topology-relationship title="Relationship between fgOTN topology and OTN topology model"}

The entities, TE attributes and OTN attributes, such as nodes, termination points and links, are still applicable for describing an fgOTN topology and the model presented in this document only specifies technology-specific attributes/information. The fgOTN-specific attributes including the fgTS, can be used to represent the bandwidth and label information. At the same time, it is necessary to extend the encoding and switching-capability enumeration values in {{?I-D.busi-teas-te-types-update}} to identify that the current Tunnel Termination Point (TTP) is a termination point of an fgOTN tunnel.

> ## Node Augmentation

Author: We still need to have a discussion on Issue #4 to identify what we need to make this augmentation, after that we can update the title.

> ## Node Augmentation

Reviewer: Resolved with https://github.com/YuChaode/draft-tan-ccamp-fgotn-yang/pull/3/commits/5c385ec3f312ea76c8186e3dbc9c9592ee72cac1

   +--rw supported-fgotn-tp?   boolean
~~~~

> The boolean value supported-fgotn-tp is used to indicate whether the termination point can support fgOTN switching capability.

Author: See issue #4 .

## Bandwidth Augmentation

> Based on the OTN topology model, we augment the bandwidth information of fgOTN, including the max-link-bandwidth and unreserved-bandwidth. The augmented parameter fgotn-bandwidth is used to indicate how much of the bandwidth has been allocated for the usage of fgOTN. For example, if 2 ODU0s are allocated to support fgOTN switching switching, the fgotn-bandwidth is 2500, and the unit is Mbps.

Reviewer: I would suggest to keep the string type in the v02 update to present at the April 10, 2025 interim meeting and create a new issue to track the need to further discuss this data type.

> Based on the OTN topology model, we augment the bandwidth information of fgOTN, including the max-link-bandwidth and unreserved-bandwidth. The augmented parameter fgotn-bandwidth is used to indicate how much of the bandwidth has been allocated for the usage of fgOTN. For example, if 2 ODU0s are allocated to support fgOTN switching switching, the fgotn-bandwidth is 2500, and the unit is Mbps.

Author: To be discussed later
